## Discussion {.page_break_before}

While lung adenocarcinomas primarily contain missense mutations in p53, most studies using mouse models of lung adenocarcinoma utilize a p53-null (_Trp53^fl/fl^_) allele instead of alleles encoding hotspot missense mutations [@pmid:23550210]. This is most likely because prior mutant-p53 alleles were null for _Trp53_ prior to Cre-mediated recombination, leaving every cell in the mouse sensitive to leukemias, lymphomas and sarcomas due to being partially p53-deficient [@pmid:16288016; @pmid:16166291; @pmid:15607980]. Our work has been made possible by newly described "wildtype to mutant" p53 alleles that allow for mice to be fully wildtype for p53 in all cells prior to Cre-mediated recombination[@pmid:30262850]. This strategy is crucial, as it allows for temporally extended experiments not confounded by separate malignancies. Here, we utilize &quot;wildtype to mutant&quot;_Trp53^R172H^_ and _Trp53^R245W^_ alleles R245W to determine how they alter tumor progression in a BRAF(V600E) model of lung cancer. We show that p53^R172H^ and p53^R245W^ accelerates lung tumor progression and increases the rate of dedifferentiation beyond complete loss of p53 expression.

Although point mutations in the _TP53_ gene can poison the natural tumor suppressive mechanisms of p53 protein, not all point mutations are equivalent in executing these functions. Mutations in the DNA-binding domain are most common and most potent at ablating normal p53 function. Taking advantage of a conditional BRAF^V600E^ lung tumor model where BRAF^V600E^ expression in AT2 cells drives benign tumor formation, we show that either p53^R172H^ or p53^R245W^ can bypass growth arrest and influence tumor progression and therapeutic sensitivity beyond how p53 loss can. Specifically, P53^R172H^ reduces survival and sensitivity to dabrafenib plus trametinib _in vivo_. Interestingly, a single allele of p53^R172H^ has a stronger tumor promoting phenotype than P53^R245W^. These findings further support a hierarchy model of p53 missense mutations, where conformation mutants such as p53^R175H^ have a stronger dominant-negative effect on wildtype p53, while mice with a single _trp53^fl^_ allele can still suppress tumorigenesis with one copy of wildtype but are prone to Loss of heterozygosity [@pmid:30262850; @pmid:27585860; @pmid:15607980].



In BRAF-driven lung adenocarcinoma, the repressive role of wild-type p53 is initiated by oncogenic stress brought about by increasing levels of MAPK-pathway activation[@pmid:17299132] . Hyperactivation of the MAPK pathway triggers p19/ARF to block MDM2, leading to p53 accumulation[@pmid:16957739; @pmid:21107428; @pmid:21107427]. Therefore, p53 acts late in lung adenocarcinoma, in contrast to pancreatic adenocarcinoma, where p53 is triggered early likely through PDAC-specific increases in p19/ARF through either increased PI3K, STAT3, or DMP1 [@pmid:27585860]. Our studies in BRAF(V600E) mutant lung adenocarcinomas reinforce this concept, as mutant-p53 does not accelerate growth in early tumors (supplemental figure). Furthermore, p53 is not detected until later stage tumor development and correlates with p19/ARF expression and increased phospho-ERK1/2 levels. Our studies indicate that mutant-p53 levels are associated with increased expression of p19/ARF. Therefore, any gain-of-function phenotype manifested by mutant-p53 must depend on accumulated p19/ARF. Thus, ablating the ARF tumor suppressor in human cancers with GOF _TP53_ mutants may paradoxically lead to tumor regression.

While most _TP53_ mutations observed in cancer result in an inability to bind DNA, they are often stable and preserve functional oligomerization and transcriptional transactivation domains[@pmid:24394915]. Thus, mutant-p53 can still interact with and affect the function of cellular processes. Supporting this rationale we observe altered transcriptomes with both p53^R172H^ and p53^R245W cell lines compared to p53-null. Consistent with previous mutant-p53 GOF studies, we observed enriched genes associated with EMT and cell-cycle entry with p53^R172H^ and p53^R245W^.

Many GOF phenotypes exhibited by mutant-p53 have centered around drug resistant mechanisms. Previous studies have shown that mutant-p53 can confer resistance to pathway targeted therapy and chemotherapies. Our studies highlight that p53^R172H^ and p53^R245W^ can confer resistance to BRAF-targeted therapy. Here, we show p53-R172H and p53-R245W cell lines are resistant to BRAF(V600E) inhibition and less sensitivity to the combination of BRAF+MEK inhibition. In pancreatic cancer models with LSL-p53-R172H expression, mutant-p53 regulates PDGFR-signaling to promote an invasive phenotype that is sensitive to Imatinib[@pmid:24725405]. Consistent with these findings, our transcriptional analysis and immunoblotting indicate p53-R172H and p53-R245W cells express PDGF-ligands and exhibit PDGFR-pathway activation.

In summary, we have compared the tumorigenic potential of three _^Trp53^_ alleles (_Trp53^fl/fl^_, _Trp53^R172H^_, and _Trp53^R245W^_) concurrently with _BRAF^V600E^_. _Trp53^R172H^_ and _Trp53^R245W^_ promoted more aggressive lung cancers exhibited by larger tumors and tumor dedifferentiation. However, only _Trp53^R172H^_ was observed to shorten survival compared to _Trp53^fl/fl^_. Moreover, _Trp53^R172H^_ and _Trp53^R245W^_ cell lines were refractory to dabrafenib and trametinib and were more proliferative. _Trp53^R172H^_ and _Trp53^R245W^_ cell lines had altered transcriptomes compared to p53-null cells and were highly enriched in genes involved in cell cycle proliferation. Our work highlights the importance of studying disease-relevant _TP53_ alleles in pre-clinical modeling systems.


