## Introduction {.page_break_before}
Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) remains deadliest form of cancer since 1987 (Siegel, Miller et al. 2021). It is characterized by alterations in the MAP kinase (MAPK) pathway, including activating mutations in the oncoproteins EGFR, KRAS (G12C, G12D, G12V) or BRAF^V600E^ [@pmid:25079552; @pmid:16705038; @pmid:11751630; @pmid:17299132]. The recognized predominant cell of origin for LUAD, lung alveolar type-2 pneumocyte cells (AT2), are exquisitely responsive to the transformative properties of constitutive activation of the MAPK pathway [@pmid:24586047; @pmid:31951518]. Indeed, conditionally genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) of mutationally activated EGFR, KRAS, or BRAF form lung tumors that strongly resemble key characteristics of human LUAD. However, tumors formed in all three models (KRAS:G12D, EGFR: Deletion 19 or L858R, or BRAF:V600E) develop only into histologically low- to mid-grade cancer and are growth arrested [@pmid:11751630; @pmid:16705038; @pmid:17299132]. Prior research has determined that oncogene-induced tumor growth arrest occurs through activation of several tumor suppression mechanisms, most notably, p53-mediated tumor suppression [@pmid:26001956].

Alterations in the _TP53_ tumor suppressor gene are common in all cancer types, including LUAD [@pmid:27328919]. P53 encodes a transcription factor that responds to a variety of cell stresses, such as DNA damage and oncogene activation. In response to stress, p53 is stabilized and induces anti-proliferative and genome-mending effects through trans-activation of a diverse set of P53-target genes [@pmid:33518400; @pmid:11099028]. p53 mutations observed in cancer frequently occur in the DNA binding domain where a single amino acid change results in dysfunctional DNA-binding and failed transcriptional activation [@pmid:20182602]. Therefore, mutated p53 that is defunct in p53 transcriptional regulation results in failed tumor suppression and cancer outgrowth. Furthermore, defective p53 signaling will permit future genomic insults to remain unchecked thus fostering an environment primed for malignant potential. Since mutant-p53 lacks transcriptional activity through its inability to bind DNA, it is unable to induce expression of its negative regulators, ARF, MDM2 and MDMX [@pmid:8265599; @pmid:8319905]. Lack of negative feedback results in mutant-p53 stabilization. Accumulation of mutant p53 has been reported to elicit gain-of-function p53 activity. Thus, any gain-of-function activity in mutant-p53 cannot be studied with p53-genetic deletion. Many research groups have characterized gain-of-function phenotypes of mutant-p53 in cancer. For instance, mice expressing mutant-p53 have altered disease phenotype compared to p53-null models [@pmid:15607980;@pmid:15607981]. Specifically in lung cancer model systems, mutant-p53 has been observed to modulate SMAD3, NF$\kappa$B, p63, TGF$\beta$, and others to drive various hallmarks of cancer such as invasion, chemoresistance, metabolism, and propagation of a stem cell fate [@pmid:34178628 ;@pmid:11238924;@pmid:19345189]. Although the mechanisms that leads to these altered processes are controversial, it is thought that the main affect is through mutant-p53 binding and sequestering known p53-associated proteins. This often leads to activation of transcription factors such as NF-Y [@pmid:33839689].

In BRAF^V600E^ GEMMs, when p53 function is abolished by _Trp53_ gene deletion or by _Cdkn2a_ deletion, lung tumors can escape growth arrest and undergo malignant transformation [@pmid:17299132; @pmid:26001956]. Furthermore, p53 pathway dysregulation allows a cell to sample diverse phenotypic landscapes that allow for enhanced cell fitness and tumor outgrowth [@pmid:32707077]. However, BRAF^V600E^ lung tumorigenesis and progression to malignant lung adenocarcinoma has only been studied in the context of p53 genetic deletion, not p53 mutation, which are more frequently seen in human lung cancer. Specifically, p53-R172H and p53-R245W are murine homologues of common hotspots in human cancer R175H and R245W, respectively.

Here, we characterize the differential impact of p53(null), as well as p53 hotspot mutations p53^R712H^ (R175H in humans) and p53^R245W^ (R248W in humans) on BRAF^V600E^ lung tumorigenesis. We observed significantly differential effects of p53-R172H on BRAF^V600E^-driven lung tumorigenesis that was not observed when p53 is deleted, such as enhanced tumor size and decreased survival. Our findings highlight functional differences in mutant-p53 biology, as well as the importance and the utility of clinically relevant mutant-p53 mouse models.
